








Facilities Protection 
 


























STATE OF GEORGIA
Public Service Commission

Jason Shaw, Chairman






Commissioners
Fitz Johnson, Vice-ChairmanTim EcholsLauren “Bubba” McDonaldTricia Pridemore 




Login Sitemap
Advanced Search
















































Menu





The PSC

Meet the Commission

Jason Shaw
Fitz Johnson
Tim Echols
Lauren “Bubba” McDonald
Tricia Pridemore


GPSC Information
FAQs
Agencies and Organizations


Consumer Corner

File a Complaint
File an Inquiry
File an Opinion
Status of my Complaint/Inquiry
Gas Marketers’ Scorecard
Gas Marketers’ Prices
Utility Assistance Programs


Telecom

Search Certificated Companies
Map of Georgia Area Codes


Electric

Residential Rate Surveys
Georgia Power Bill Calculator
Consumer Solar Information Portal
Georgia Power Company's Rules and Regulations for Retail Electric Service


Natural Gas

Natural Gas Competition in Georgia
Gas Marketers’ Scorecard
Gas Marketers’ Prices
Approved Natural Gas Marketers
Regulated Provider


Facilities Protection

Georgia Underground Facility Protection Act (GUFPA)
Pipeline Safety
Commission Recognized Best Practices
GUFPA Violation Reporting System
Georgia 811 - Call Before You Dig
GC-1


NewsroomMedia AdvisoriesNewslettersPSC BrochuresNews Media Contacts
Careers
Contact Us



HomeFacilities ProtectionPipeline Safety




            Pipeline Safety            
The Georgia Public Service Commission's (GPSC or Commission) Pipeline Safety Division is responsible for protecting the public and environment from the risks inherent in the transportation of natural gas or other hazardous liquid products. Through an annual certification with the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), the GPSC enforces minimum safety regulations for all jurisdictional intrastate gas pipelines in Georgia. These regulations are written to ensure safety in the (1) design, construction, testing, operation, and maintenance of pipeline facilities and (2) siting, construction, operation, and maintenance of liquefied natural gas facilities. The GPSC ensures compliance with regulations through operator inspections, enforcement actions, and accident investigations. The Commission's Pipeline Safety Division does not have jurisdiction over interstate pipelines, liquid pipelines (gasoline, carbon dioxide, etc.), or siting of any underground facilities.
The GPSC Pipeline Safety Staff consists of engineers and inspectors trained by the PHMSA Training and Qualification Program (TQ) in application of the Federal Regulations. Required safety inspections are performed on a minimum five-year basis for the gas systems to ensure compliance with the Federal Regulations. The types of inspections include, but are not limited to, comprehensive inspections, operator qualifications, public awareness programs, system integrity management programs, drug and alcohol programs, and accident investigations.
The GPSC will investigate all incidents that require notice to the Federal Office of Pipeline Safety in accordance the Federal Regulations. These investigations will typically culminate in written reports and any pertinent photographs will be kept on file at the GPSC, with copies available to the public, upon request.
All operators are reminded to use one of the following phone numbers to report incidents. Please refer to your emergency plans for the inspector to contact in your area.  In addition to calling an inspector, operators are encouraged to submit information on incidents or accidents to the GPSC’s Pipeline Safety Accident Notification email at psan@psc.ga.gov.
Click here to download a copy of this list.



Jeff Baggett
jbaggett@psc.ga.gov
404.694.4079


Daniel Clemmons
dclemmons@psc.ga.gov
470.522.6071


Jack Hewitt
jhewitt@psc.ga.gov
470.270.4586


Daphne Jones
djones@psc.ga.gov
404.719.6372


Joe Jones
jjones@psc.ga.gov
470.631.4259


David Lewis
dlewis@psc.ga.gov
404.561.1275


Glen Murphy
gmurphy@psc.ga.gov
770.833.2569


Jason Smith
jasons@psc.ga.gov
404.444.0008


Brant Sweat
bsweat@psc.ga.gov
404.991.0350


Eric Atkins
eatkins@psc.ga.gov
770.919.6045


Chuck Whitaker
cwhitaker@psc.ga.gov
470.708.0915


Washington, DC
			Response Center
phmsa.pipelinesafety@dot.gov
800.424.8802



Georgia State Program Metrics


As part of its annual grant evaluation process, PHMSA performs thorough evaluations of each state pipeline safety regulatory program. To support this evaluation PHMSA and the National Association of Pipeline Safety Representatives (NAPSR) have developed a set of performance metrics. Please click here to review these metrics.


Operators


List of Natural Gas Pipeline Operators

 


Quick links

File a complaint
File an opinion
Check Status of my Complaint



Upcoming Events
Aug



Aug
19




9:30 pm



Administrative Session 08-19-2025


 






Aug
20




10:00 am



GUFPA Hearing 8-20-2025


 






Aug
28




9:30 am



Facilities Protection/Telecommunication/Energy And Administrative Affairs Committees 08-28-2025


 


  













State of Georgia
Public Service Commission







 
                        





REPORT A PROBLEM WITH THIS SITE
                            











The Commission

GPSC Information
GPSC Press Kit
PSC Annual Reports



Online Services

File an Online Complaint
Georgia Power Bill Calculator
GUFPA Damage Reporting System
GC-1



PSC Agendas & Calendars

Agendas & Calendars
Filing Information
Contact Information



PSC Careers and Job Information

Georgia Careers Information
Department of Labor
PSC Vacancies
Applications



©2025 Georgia Public Service Commission. All rights reserved.















