Title V Rules and FeesSite NavigationAir Quality Permits in Your DEQ OnlineHelp Finding the Right PermitTechnical Assistance and Permit InquiriesFrequently Asked QuestionsAir Contaminant Discharge Permitsexpand_moreAir Contaminant Discharge PermitsSimple, Standard and Construction ACDP Application and Reporting FormsBasic and General Air Contaminant Discharge PermitsBasic Autobody PermitSmall Solid Fuel-Fired BoilersTitle V Permitsexpand_moreTitle V Forms and GuidanceTitle V Reporting FormsTitle V Rules and FeesDEQ Seeks Feedback on Title V Alternative Fee StructuresShort-Term 1-Hour and 24-Hour NAAQS RequirementsIncinerator RuleSource Monitoring and Testing GuidanceSearch for Air Quality Permitsexpand_moreSearch Your DEQ OnlineSearch DEQ Air Permits Online (for documents before November 2024)Document and Permit TypesSmall Business Assistanceexpand_moreAir Quality Small Business Assistance ProgramSmall Business ResourcesAir Quality Permitting Guidance for BusinessesNational Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP)Cleaner Air Oregon Permitting RequirementsTitle V of the1990 Federal Clean Air Actrequires each state to develop a comprehensive operating permit program for major industrial sources of air pollution. The program clarifies the environmental obligations of a business by organizing in one document all of a business' air pollution control requirements.The Title V Operating Permit Program does not require any tighter emissions standards; it does, however, place a greater responsibility on the business for monitoring, reporting and certifying compliance with the conditions of the permit.As defined in the program, a major source of air emissions has the potential to emit 100 tons of any criteria pollutant. Or, for emitters of hazardous air pollutants, a major source has the potential to emit 10 tons of any single hazardous air pollutant or 25 tons of any combination of hazardous air pollutants. A major source can choose to limit its potential to emit through federally enforceable physical or operational restrictions on the facility and can remain in the ACDP program as what is known as a synthetic minor source. Approximately 120 sources are currently permitted under the Oregon Title V Operating Permit program.Oregon Title V operating permit fee rulesFormulasList of Regulated Toxic and Flammable Substances112(r) List, OAR Division 244 Table 3Monitoring Responsibilities Increase​The Oregon Title V Operating Permit Program places greater responsibilities  on the source of air pollution. When a business applies for a permit, it is  required to supply the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) with all  the information necessary to draft a permit. After the permit is issued, the  permitted source has a responsibility to monitor its compliance with  requirements of the permit and to keep detailed records and reports.DEQ's role is to evaluate the information provided by the business, issue the  permit and make periodic compliance determinations through inspections and  review of reports and records and take enforcement action when appropriate.Under the Title V Operating Permit Program, a business has to report on  compliance with conditions of its permit at least every six months. At that  time, a responsible official must either certify compliance or inform DEQ of  noncompliance and submit a schedule to bring the business into compliance. If  certifications are falsified, federal and state law provide for both civil and  criminal enforcement actions. Violations found to be knowing are now a felony,  with potential for imprisonment for up to 5 years and fines up to $250,000.The 1990 Clean Air Act gives important new enforcement powers to the U.S.  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and DEQ. In the past, EPA had to go to  court to penalize a company for violations. Now EPA can issue administrative  penalty orders of up to $25,000 per violation. Like a police officer giving  traffic tickets, EPA also has the authority to fine violators up to $5000 for  minor violations observed in the field. DEQ continues to use its authority to  issue administrative penalties and also has added enforcement provisions where  knowing endangerment from the release of air toxics can carry imprisonment of up  to 15 years and fines up to $1 million. Citizen lawsuit provisions also have  been expanded in the Act.Public Participation​Under the Title V Operating Permit Program, there are increased opportunities  for the public to take part in determining how the law will be carried out. All  new permits, renewals, and significant permit modifications must have a public  notice period during which citizens can comment on the permit and request a  public hearing. Issues that are not resolved with DEQ can be appealed to EPA.  Neighboring states and EPA also have more opportunity to comment on permit  content.Funding​The entire cost of the Title V Operating Permit Program is funded throughemission fees, base fees and user feesfrom the regulated businesses. The emission fees will result in the industries with the highest emissions paying the majority of the cost of the program.What is in a Title V operating permit?​The Title V Operating Permit organizes in a single document all the air 		requirements which apply to the permit holder. The operating permit 		follows the same structure and format as the current ACDP but contains 		greater detail. The operating permit begins with a list of permitted 		activities and describes all emission units and pollution control 		devices at the facility. Then the permit lists all of the emission 		limits and standards which apply to the facility. The next section of 		the permit describes methods of monitoring and record keeping to be used 		by the business to determine compliance with all applicable 		requirements.Finally, the permit describes the methods to be used by the business for  reporting and certifying compliance to DEQ. In contrast, the state ACDPs contain  less detail in the identification of emission units. The ACDPs typically do  not list all applicable requirements, require less monitoring, and have less  detailed record keeping and reporting requirements.New Emission Levels in Permits​Many of the Title V Operating Permits include increases in permitted  emissions. Some of these are actual increases where the permittee has requested  higher levels of production or installed new equipment. In these cases, DEQ has  required the business to address applicable rules prior to granting any  increases in emissions. Other emissions increases, as well as decreases, in the  operating permit do not represent an actual emission change but are a paperwork  increase or decrease. Many of the paperwork increases result from the new permit  including equipment that wasn't covered in the previous ACDP permit. The  equipment may have always been operating at the site and meeting all applicable  requirements; but unlike the new Title V Operating Permits, the ACDP didn't  require all of the equipment to be included in the permit.Paperwork increases also result from the new permit having expanded to  include emission limits for all regulated air pollutants emitted by the devices  and processes at the facility. The prior permit may not have included emission  limits for all regulated air pollutants. Paperwork increases or decreases may  also occur when corrections are made to information used to set emission limits  in previous ACDP permits. In prior permits, emission limits were often based on  estimated emission factors.In preparation for the Title V Operating Permit, many ACDP holders 		extensively tested and measured their actual emissions. This new 		information almost always leads to an increase or decrease in permitted 		emission levels. It does not allow an increase or require a decrease in 		allowable emissions. There is no change in the actual emissions from the 		business--the paperwork correction improves the accuracy of the 		permitted emissions.Hazardous Air Pollutants​The Clean Air Act requires that states use the Title V Operating Permit  system to administer  theair toxics  program. Although the majority of Title V Operating Permits do not contain  enforceable limits on specific hazardous air pollutants, most hazardous  air pollutants are regulated as particulate or VOCs. The review report of the  permit will usually contain rough estimates of other hazardous air emissions.  These estimates in the review report are for information purposes only and are  not specified as enforceable limits. As techniques for estimating hazardous air  pollutant emissions improve, some of these estimates may increase while others  decrease.EPA has set standards requiring companies to sharply reduce "routine"  emissions of hazardous air pollutants. EPA will do so by setting performance  standards based on the best demonstrated controls and practices for each  regulated industry, termed Maximum Achievable Control Technology (MACT). Should  EPA miss an established deadline for setting a MACT standard, the states must  issue these standards.EPA has also established a list of substances that are particularly hazardous  when inadvertently released into the air by an unanticipated or uncontrolled  event. Title V Operating Permit applications require the business to indicate  the range of the facility's annual usage of these chemicals. Facilities that use  more than established quantities of these substances will be required to prepare  risk management plans and comply with accidental release prevention regulations.