Public NoticesAll public notices generated by DANR are available below with links
              provided to each public notice and supporting information. If you would like more information
              than what is provided, please email us atDANRMail@state.sd.usor call (605) 773-3151 for further assistance.Subscribe To Email Updates.You can be notified weekly by email when
              public notices are added to this page. Subscribe to the service by providing your email address
              toDANRMail@state.sd.us.
              Your email address will not be used for any other purposes.How to File  a Comment/Petition.In the following tables, certain public notices  allow for submission
              of comments or petitions by  the specified deadline date shown in the table. If online
              submission is available, the listed deadline date  is a link you can use to
              access the online comment/petition form. If online submission is NOT available, please follow the instructions provided in the public notice  to submit a comment/petition.Tips for Submitting Effective Public Comments.Proposed Rules.(One-stop website
                for
                all state agency rule proceedings) Notice of public hearing for adoption of rules.Air Quality Permit.A permit is needed for businesses that emit air
                pollution. For more information onair quality
                  permittingor to viewcontested cases...Air Quality(Annual Air Monitoring Network Plan and Five Year
                    Review). The state must complete an annual plan and a five
                year plan which reviews the state's ambient air monitoring network.Air Quality(State Implementation Plan).South Dakota's
                "State Implementation Plan" includes state laws, regulations, and other documents that
                demonstrate South Dakota's air quality is meeting the federal National Ambient Air Quality Standards.Brownfields. Identify brownfields properties and available funding to
                  cleanup areas polluted by a hazardous substance, pollutant or contaminant. For more
                    information please visit ourBrownfields webpageCurrent Public NoticeConcentrated Animal Feeding Operations(State Permit). Coverage under a state general permit has been
                  applied for by the following new or expanding concentrated animal feeding operation(s).
                  These permits do not address land use decisions such as setbacks to homes or schools,
                  odors, flies, or road/traffic issues, which may be handled by county zoning.For
                    more information...Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations (NPDES Permit). Coverage under a
                  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit has been applied
                  for by the following concentrated animal feeding operation(s). These permits do not
                  address land use decisions such as setbacks to homes or schools, odors, flies, or
                  road/traffic issues, which may be handled by county zoning.For more
                    information...Funding (State Revolving Fund Intended Use Plans). Public notice of funding
                  for water, wastewater, solid waste and recycling projects.For
                    more information...General Permits. DANR administers a variety of general permits that provide
                  permit coverage for those activities covered by each type of general permit. Existing
                  general permits are subject to renewal periodically.To
                    view contested cases...Ground Water Discharge. A plan needs to be approved for discharges to ground
                  water. For more information onground
                    water discharge permitsor to viewcontested cases...Integrated Report (Surface Water Quality). A biennial report integrating the
                  contents of two reports required under sections 303(d) and 305(b) of the Clean Water Act.For more
                    information on past integrated
                    reports...Mining(Determination of Special, Exceptional, Critical, or
                      Unique Lands). Determine whether lands potentially affected by
                  a proposed mining operation are eligible for inclusion on the preliminary list of special,
                  exceptional, critically affected, or unique lands. For more information onnew mine permit applicationsor to viewcontested cases...Mineral Exploration.An Exploration Notice of Intent (EXNI) is required when
                  exploring for minerals such as gold, silver, other precious metals, coal, bentonite,
                  dimension stone, and decorative stone.For more
                    information...Mining Permit. A permit is required for the extraction and processing of
                  minerals such as gold, silver, uranium, precious metals, coal, bentonite, dimension stone,
                  and decorative stone. For more information onMine Permitsor to viewcontested cases...Oil and Gas. Approval is needed for actions such as spacing, establishing
                  new fields, forced pooling, and unitization.For more
                    information or to view processed applicationsor to viewcontested cases...Surface Water Discharge (NPDES). A
                  permit is needed to discharge pollutants to surface waters of
                  the state.For more informationor to viewcontested cases...Surface Water Enhancement & Restoration.Approval is needed to
                  introduce toxic pollutants in surface waters for the purpose of water resource enhancement
                  or restoration if the overall goals of the project justify the short-term detriment.Surface Water - 401 Certification.Activities impacting surface water
                  need Section 401 Water Quality Certification to ensure measures are in place to minimize
                  impacts to surface waters.Waste Management - Hazardous Waste.A permit is required for certain
                  facilities that conduct hazardous waste treatment, storage and/or disposal.  For more
                  information abouthazardous
                    wasteor to viewcontested
                    cases...Waste Management - Municipal Solid Waste.Notice of final decision on
                  issuance of a municipal solid waste permit.Waste Management - Solid Waste. A permit is
                  required to own or operate any solid waste facility.  For more information aboutsolid wasteor to
                  viewcontested cases...Water Management Board(Miscellaneous). Miscellaneous
                  actions under the authority of the Water Management Board including establishment of
                  ordinary high and low water marks and outlet elevations for lakes; petition for a
                  declaratory ruling etcTo view contested
                    cases...Water Rights. A permit is needed for allwater
                    usesexcept for domestic uses. For
                  more information onhearing proceduresor to viewcontested applications...Water Rights -- Future Use Review. A water permit to appropriate water for
                  future use is subject to review at least once every seven years. For more information
                  aboutfuture use permitsor to viewcontested cases...Watershed Projects(Total Maximum Daily Loads). A TMDL
                  (total maximum daily load) is a calculation of the maximum amount of a pollutant that a
                  waterbody can receive and still meet water quality standards.View
                    a schedule and summary of projects...Note:This page is provided as a public service and
                    does not constitute official public notice unless otherwise provided by law. Every
                    effort will be made to keep this page up-to-date. However, any inadvertent omission
                    or error will not invalidate a public notice or any action taken concerning a public
                    notice.All rights reserved. Redirection of this content to any site
                  other than https://danr.sd.gov is not permitted.Public Affairs ResourcesRELATED PAGESPress HomePublic NoticesContested CasesData & MappingPermitting GuidesBoard MeetingsApplications & FormsJobsPlans & Specifications