











South Dakota Pipeline Safety Program





Consumer Assistance |
    	Energy |
	Telecom | 
	    Warehouse |
	Commission Actions | 
    Miscellaneous


 
 
 
 
 
 




        
        	Public Utilities Commission 
            Capitol Building, 1st floor 
            500 E. Capitol Ave. 
            Pierre, SD 57501-5070 
            Phone: (605) 773-3201


E-filings
Consumer Assistance
Outage Reporting
Contact PUC
PUC  Events
Employment Opportunity
Forms
News
SD Do Not Call Program
Statutes &
                Administrative Rules






















 
 

 Pipeline Safety  | previous page

South    Dakota Pipeline Safety Program
The South Dakota Public Utilities Commission, through  the Pipeline Safety Program, is responsible for regulating hazardous gas  intrastate pipelines to ensure the public is provided safe and dependable gas  service. 
The Office of Pipeline Safety, within the U.S. Department of Transportation, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety  Administration, has overall regulatory responsibility for hazardous liquid and gas pipelines under its jurisdiction in the United States. Through certification by OPS, the PUC regulates,  inspects, and enforces intrastate gas pipeline safety requirements.
      
The PUC staff has pipeline safety authority to inspect and investigate intrastate natural gas pipeline operators, master meter operators, jurisdictional propane systems and liquefied natural gas facilities for compliance with statutes and administrative rules. 
The program is funded through an inspection fee on the pipeline operators and by reimbursements from the federal pipeline safety program. The commission has rulemaking authority to calculate, assess and collect the fee on the pipeline operators.
The Pipeline Safety Program has jurisdiction over 304 miles of transmission and 5,367 miles of distribution pipelines that serve 224,841 South Dakota customers. The South Dakota operators subject to the  program's jurisdiction include four natural gas distribution system operators, four municipal natural gas system operators  and seven intrastate transmission pipeline operators. 
Staff 
        Two staff engineers, with support from  staff attorneys, carry out the primary duties of the Pipeline Safety Program. They receive assistance from the PUC's management, administrative and communications staff as needed.
Pipeline  Operators
The PUC's safety jurisdiction covers intrastate gas transmission operators, municipal and investor-owned intrastate gas  distribution operators, intrastate gas master meter operators and intrastate  propane operators. 
Inspections
Trained staff members from the PUC's Pipeline Safety Program conduct a number of inspections throughout the year to ensure pipelines are operating safely and adhering to federal and state laws and rules. Inspections involve physical testing and visual examinations of pipeline facilities as well as reviews of records maintained by the pipeline operator to verify scheduled maintenance is being performed and operator training and certification are current.
Biogas  Line Notices 
Forms 
The PUC provides examples of forms used by its Pipeline Safety Program inspectors.      
Training and Seminars
        The  PUC Pipeline Safety Program provides training and qualifications seminars and  operator assistance visits upon request. Training may be conducted on location  or at a common site for multiple operators. Types of on-location assistance  include public awareness program development and gas integrity management  program development; training on additional regulations is available. Call  the PUC at (605) 773-3201 to inquire about training assistance from Pipeline  Safety Program staff. . 
Pipeline Informational Filings (includes incident investigations)
        The PUC posts non-docketed information regarding pipeline safety issues. 
Excavation Damages
South Dakota Significant  Incidents and Mileage Overview, PHMSA
State of South Dakota Helpful Links 

PUC pipeline safety dockets
South Dakota Statutes, Pipeline Safety, SDCL 49-34B
South   Dakota Administrative Rules, Pipeline Safety, ARSD 20:10:37
South Dakota Administrative Rules, Assessment of  Fees for Intrastate Gas Pipeline Operators ARSD 20:10:31
South Dakota One Call

Other Helpful Links

Landowner's  Guide to Pipelines
National Pipeline Mapping System
Code of Federal Regulations 49 Part 191, Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline;  Annual Reports, Incident Reports and Safety-Related Condition Reports
Code of Federal Regulations 49 Part 192, Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline; Minimum Federal Safety Standards 
Common Ground Alliance (CGA)
U.S. Dept. of Transportation Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA)

PHMSA Rulemaking Documents
PHMSA Advisory Bulletins


National Association of Pipeline Safety Representatives (NAPSR)


 
 
 
 
 
 




Consumer Assistance |
        Energy |
        Telecom |       
        Warehouse |
        Commission Actions | 
        Miscellaneous

Home |
       	Forms |
        PUC  Events |
        News |
       E-Filing | 
        SD Do Not Call Program |
        Contact PUC 



SD Home Page | 
            Feedback  
            | Privacy |
            Disclaimer





